---
title: Highs & Lows
author: Shreyan Sen
category: shorts
layout: post
---


"This is your mistake," Jion said. "When you see a woman and you feel anxious or afraid, it's your system warning you. Your system is saying clearly this woman is not for you. It's just like if you were to ingest a poison and your body were to react immediately. Not that the woman herself is necessarily poisonous. One person's favorite snack is another person's allergic reaction. But instead of listening to your feelings and trusting your system, you try to double down. You feel your fear and you think, this is me being weak, so I'm going to power through that weakness. I'm going to force myself to overcome my fear and go talk to her. But ironically this is exactly what makes you weak."

"Right," Sozan said. "I get it. When I do that I'm acting against my system's clear signals. I'm fighting myself instead of flowing down the path."

"The best sign is if things feel natural and clear right from the beginning," Jion said. "Any moment of fear is a huge warning that this person is not meant for you."

"Right. It's difficult because this goes against all the advice and cultural conditioning we've ever received about dating. The butterflies are the sparks. You're supposed to follow them. Some men make entire careers out of powering through their feelings and teaching others to do the same. Coming up with masks and lines and tossing them at every woman they can."

"Such an approach will rarely find real compatibility," Jion said. "A connection between two masks goes nowhere." 

Sozan paused. "Of course, when I used to draw self-worth and validation from my relationships with women (or lack thereof), that made me afraid of egoistic loss and gain when it came to dating. Talking to any woman I might be interested in was a little scary, because I already had something at stake: my self-image. Or maybe it was being alone (failure) vs. being in a relationship (success) that was at stake, before I felt like I could be complete alone. In any case there were other things at stake. I had to work on freeing myself from those things before my body was capable of giving clear signals about my connection to another person."

"We've talked about your tendency towards infatuation and limerence. You wrote about it once."

"Yeah. The Limerence System was what we called it. A system of highs and lows. She texts you, and you're over the moon. She likes me! You text back right away, and then you're waiting. And waiting. And waiting. And your mind's like, damn, she most definitely does not like me. And then she texts back. The cycle continues. What changed everything for me was you saying that in this cycle of highs and lows, the lows actually power the highs! That's exactly right--it's the long wait and the suffering that makes the next text such a hit of hope and dopamine. I'm paying into the Limerence System with my own suffering. It's like a rubber band. You pull and pull and you're putting energy into it, and when you let go it's that energy you've put into it that flings forward. In the Limerence System you don't actually get the joy unless you're paying with the pain! It's not just limerence by the way. Any kind of addictive path with huge highs punctuating long lows is usually using the lows to power the highs. It's like not drinking water all day so you can enjoy that delicious cool flow through the lens of your thirst. You're just stealing from yourself now to give to yourself later! There's no value being produced here. In fact it's a total ripoff because the exchange rate you get is actually terrible. You end up living life thirsty, and that's no way to live."

"Yes," Jion said. "And like we said before, there is another way. This is the Middle Way that we follow. In the Middle Way we don't have so much the high highs or the low lows. Instead we tend to experience a gentle flow of enough-ness. Sometimes highs do happen, and lows happen too. But we are quicker to return to our baseline enough-ness. This baseline can be a lovely place when we're not so anxious to run away from it. If we're running away from it, it becomes boredom. It is beneficial to learn to call this middle ground home. Because we are not craving and chasing the highs, we don't get stuck in the lows that they feed on."

"So, coming back to dating," Sozan said. "Instead of getting hooked on the excitement of uncertainty--hunting for butterflies--we root ourselves into our healthy flow and allow ourselves to make spontaneous connections from that place. And sometimes those connections grow in a romantic direction. Dating from the Middle Way instead of the Limerence System builds more stable relationships too. I've definitely suffered from the curse of the three month lover--you're super into someone, and then three months later the feelings wear off and you realize you're just not that into them. Well what happened was that you were never into them. You were just riding your own Limerence System. A steady stable real relationship doesn't provide the sequence of highs and lows that the Limerence System feeds on to survive. A toxic one might though!"

"Why do you think people seem to prefer the highs and lows to the Middle Way?" Jion asked.

"Well, there's definitely the addictive aspect. They call it getting high for a reason. There's also the video game effect, or maybe you could call it the storyline effect. We imagine our existence as this narrative built on a constant goal oriented motion from wherever we are to somewhere else. We beat this level so we can get to the next level so we can get to the next level. We love getting there, but we don't know how to be there. When you beat the final boss, how long do you chill on the victory screen? You don't! You start the game over. A story can't keep going after happily ever after. If there was just stability and satisfaction beginning middle and end, it wouldn't look like the kind of story we're used to. Our minds are built as problem-solving engines, which also means they're problem-creating engines. We don't feel comfortable without our problems. Who are we without our struggling? Highs and lows create the gradient along which we move. So we're always trying to go low to high, or preventing ourselves from going high to low. The reason we don't like peace is that peace is a stopping, and stopping feels like death. Peace is when you flatline! All is flat--there is nowhere else to roll. And yet, the most beautiful moments of my life were what I like to call 'roll credits' moments. Moments where everything felt complete, and there was nothing that needed changing or doing. In those moments, I felt like I'd reached the place where there was nowhere left to go, as Jhumpa Lahiri put it. There was nothing to do but be. I was living in the happily ever after--and there was still life and motion there!"

"Then what happened?"

"I came back down. I guess I relied on a lot of euphoria in those moments. So the system of highs and lows was still dominating. But I would venture to guess that the stopping was real too. That there are stories that live on in the land beyond happily ever after. Maybe that stopping is just another kind of beginning."

"You'll have to find out for yourself. In the meantime, don't make the mistake that so many make. Meditation is not for getting high. If you think you're going deeper and deeper, and things get more and more intense and blissful, until you finally explode into some super high state and now you're enlightened--well, I'm sorry to say, but you don't have it. It's the groundedness and loosening that actually allows for that spiritual energy to come into awareness, but the moment it starts to arise, people go running after it, totally abandoning the non-running that was giving rise to it. This is why in Zen we do not focus on awakening, we just practice to practice. There is nothing wrong with the magical land beyond happily ever after, and you can enjoy your wandering there. But when you are done, know that you will always come back to this place. Here, your simple life, your simple home. Your mop and your vegetables and your feeding yourself and your friends. And here you will practice integration. It is a life sentence."

"Mmm. I see." Sozan paused, and felt the energy in his belly and heart and throat. "Then I'll put it like this. We went to that beautiful place where there was nowhere left to go...and then, we turned around, and we went home."