---
title: Why Does The Killing Continue
author: Shreyan Sen
category: shorts
layout: post
---
As a teenager I became obsessed with the problem of genocide. Witnessing the mass death of beings felt enormous, awful, and addicting. It created a psychological wound in me that demanded attention, energizing me through pain. I would guess this pain acted rather like cycles of physical self-harm do. I got involved with human rights organizations and took classes on genocide and other demons of mass death, like the horrific man-made famines that characterized centuries of British rule in India. I read the canon: Samantha Powers' A Problem From Hell, Paul Rusesabagina's An Ordinary Man, Mike Davis' Late Victorian Holocausts, Ishmael Beah's A Long Way Gone, Victor Frankl's Man's Search for Meaning. 

Genocide is a mirror we hate looking in. It makes us feel things about ourselves that we can't accept. What are we? How can it be this way? Could I ever participate in this? Haven't I already? Managing our feelings about genocide becomes a matter of greater concern than genocide itself. Since we can struggle to accept the possibility of so great an evil in ourselves (or, conversely but to no different effect, become perversely addicted to our apparent complicity), we invent fictions about the people who hungrily commit genocide. Those people are where the evil exists. They must be pure evil--this is the only explanation for their behavior. In our society Nazi is synonymous with evil. As long as genocide is something those evil people over there do, it's not something I have to ever worry about doing. Let it remain an incomprehensible evil--if I'm the kind of person who can't comprehend such a thing, then I must be the kind of person who can't commit such a thing.

My disillusionment began after reading the book Machete Season by Jean Hatzfeld. The book interviews men who participated in the Rwandan genocide, asking directly to understand why and how people come to take up the blade and massacre their neighbors. It was through this book that I learned genocide is always carried out by ordinary people. Whether or not they become monsters through their actions, they are no different from you or me. No special evil is required.

If your people took up the blade, you or someone else you love would join them in the cutting of throats--no matter how good you believe you and your loved ones are. Until people know this about themselves, genocides will continue. When we are ready to admit this about ourselves, then things change. We can actually ask the questions we need to ask, unafraid of whatever answers we find.

How did it come to this? What had to happen for me to become a genocidal killer? Genocide, like anything else in this world, has its causes and conditions. It is not simply an unspeakable unimaginable horror but a part of this world born from the fabric of human lives.

Genocide is born when you feel strongly enough that the world would be better off without certain people in it, and that these people come in packs. Be honest with yourself: haven't you ever felt that way? Isn't that how you're supposed to feel about Nazis? Do you feel this way about Hamas? Do you feel this way about the IDF? Do you feel this way about Trump and MAGA Republicans? Do you feel this way about the Chinese Communist Party and Chinese citizens? Open your eyes to how prevalent this feeling is right here at home.

In the book Zen Battles, Thich Nhat Hanh writes: "When we stick onto someone the label of 'killer,' then we can point the gun and shoot that person without hesitation. However, if we can still see that this is a person, we can never pull the trigger. In order to kill someone, we have to talk ourselves into believing that there is no goodness left in this person." Thich Nhat Hanh is not speaking theoretically, but from experience. He faced death and lost many friends in the Vietnam War, a conflict in which he refused to take sides and make other beings his enemy.

What do you think? After the attacks on Israeli civilians on October 7th 2023, do enough Israelis wish that Palestinians would just go away? That the Palestinian problem would simply disappear? Has this desire not always been there? Isn't this desire now raining down as bombs on the people of Gaza? The thousands of Palestinian children who have been murdered--how many Israelis feel today that these children are better off dead, for they would have only grown into terrorists and killers?

Genocide never looks like a cartoon villain killing a hero. Genocide looks like the extermination of evil. 

Israel is committing a genocide against Palestinians. And no doubt, the same genocidal desire lives in the hearts of many Palestinians. How could it not? What do you call a people who colonize your home, police you and subject you to constant indignity, and then rain bombs down on you? What do you call the people who massacre your mother and your father and your grandmother and your son? You call them evil and seek to exterminate them. Genocide is born in your heart. Right now it is only Israel who is actualizing genocide, but the seed of it is not only in Israelis.

When we suffer deeply, we create an enemy who is responsible and then seek for the extermination of that enemy. This is how the enemy reproduces. What enemy did Israel create? What enemy have you created?

---


Where are you and I in all this?

I don't know what to tell you other than that what's happening inside you matters to the world. Everything comes from somewhere and everything goes somewhere. The seed of genocide is within. The manner of dealing with it is not as simple as calling it evil and hating it or suppressing it. That is exactly what strengthens it. Making enemies with the energy of making enemies will not work. Just the opposite: you have to accept that this energy is real, that it is part of you and part of the world, this world which grows strange evil flowers in its unknown loving wisdom. If you think I've condemned anyone in this writing, human or monster, you've misunderstood me. 

What does it mean to accept this world, even the energies of war and genocide? How the hell does that work? Are you really going to look a Palestinian child in the eye and tell her you've accepted her family's murder? 

Accepting genocide is not liking genocide, nor is it ignoring genocide, nor is it condemning genocide. What does it mean to accept a wound on your body? It doesn't mean pretending you're not wounded. It doesn't mean hating your wound. It doesn't mean the pain of the wound ceases. It doesn't mean you can't take care of your wound. But if you haven't accepted your wound, you might just keep walking on it. If you haven't accepted it, you might be too lost in self-pity and sorrow to take care of it. If you haven't accepted it, you might even slam your fist down on it in frustration. Conversely, accepting it doesn't mean rejecting the self-pity, sorrow, and pain it brings you. All that is part of the wound you've accepted.

The other option is to accelerate into your sorrow, suffering, and hate. Become single-pointed in your righteousness. Know that your enemies are pure evil. Know that the complicit or apathetic are also enemies. Make this place your new home. This energy is called the empowered victim. The empowered victim does not want his hurt to end; in fact he is addicted to his hurt, and the greater the hurt feels, the more energy he has. The empowered victim lives as an awful cry of horror and rage, and he likes it. He uses this energy to lash out and attack--it's what he feels keeps him safe. The never again of the empowered victims says: I will never let this happen to me again, no matter what I have to do to you.

I am not saying the empowered victim is evil either. Of course I know him--he's me. But if you do not see through and accept him, you'll get stuck in him for a thousand years. More acceptance? How come every time we meet an obstacle we have to accept it? Why shouldn't I challenge the enemy? The human spirit is like water. If you try to push it down in one place, it just pops up in another. The more you splash around, trying to avoid sinking, the more turbulent the waters grow. You have to let yourself float. I'm not saying to force yourself to stop your suffering--that would be like trying to squish the sea flat. Nor am I saying to stop your advocacy efforts. Feel your tears and do what you are going to do. But in the long-term, this foolish violence will only end when we see through our foolishness, one fool at a time.

Lost in a sea of confusion, the practice is to stop deluding myself. Delusions manifest when the you you think you are cannot co-exist with a truth. How many leftists do I know who couldn't sit with and acknowledge the October 7th killings, immediately turning away from the horror and pain, rushing to justify the violence? How many Israeli apologists can't sit with and acknowledge the mass murder of thousands of children happening as we speak, immediately turning away from the horror and pain, rushing to justify the violence? And so demons are born in the mind and the killing continues happily.

