---
title: I Was Of Two Minds
author: Shreyan Sen
category: shorts
layout: post
---

Every battery hides a love story. Electrons stacked on the negative pole want to flow to the positive pole, but they can't. The middle of the battery is sealed off. There's no road from Romeo to Juliet. They just sit there yearning and dissatisfied. That yearning is called a gradient, which is just a fancy word for how much of an energetic gap there is between one end and the other. A waterfall is another kind of gradient--the higher up it is, the greater the gradient, and the more energy that falling water picks up on its way down. Same with batteries--the more yearning you put between the two poles, the more energy eventually flows when you connect them. When we put a battery into a device, that's exactly what we do. The circuits in the device provide a road for the electrons to move from the battery's negative pole to its positive pole, and an army of Romeos march off to their Juliets' balconies.

And what happens when they arrive? The yearning ends, satisfaction arises...and the battery dies. Peace, peace at last! Everybody is happy, nobody needs anything to change, and no more action happens. Oh, and your device stops working. You'll need to go get another battery.

Somewhat unfortunately for us, human minds work exactly the same way. Our actions are motivated by a gradient of cognitive dissatisfaction, which governs the direction and magnitude of our actions. We're trying to move from the current situation to another one we want more, and the gap between here and there is yearning. The more intense that gap is, the greater action we can generate. When something really unpleasant happens, you can react fast--and the same principle applies when you want something you anticipate will be really pleasant.

In both cases, the gradient is uncomfortable. It doesn't matter if you're moving away from the bad or moving towards the good--you experience the gap between what you have now and what you want as a kind of loss or craving. It's exactly that loss / craving / desire that encourages us to move from here to there. For you machine learning types, think about the way I use loss and gradient here, and what it would mean if our minds were doing a gradient descent of their own.

The Buddha was talking about this exact cognitive machinery when he laid down his first Noble Truth: Life Is Suffering. Well, a more literal translation is that life is unsatisfying. Why? Because dissatisfaction is the gradient. Our minds were not designed to sit in peace. They were designed to govern our action. What does that mean for human happiness? Well, the mind tricks us by letting us think that if we actually get what we want, we'll be happy. We do get boosts of pleasure, it's true. But the mind quickly gets back to doing its job. It identifies the next gradient and rides it to produce a fresh set of actions. In the meantime, we live in a state of constant dissatisfaction.

When does food taste best? When you're hungry! This is the mechanism of the mind. It creates a need to generate action, gives us some temporary pleasure or stops putting us in pain when we attain a result, and immediately gets back to the job of figuring out what to yearn for next. It's a never ending cycle. This is why our minds are so susceptible to addiction. Addiction is all about the cycle of highs and lows. The higher the highs and the lower the lows, the greater the gradient, and the greater the action. This is why a toxic relationship where he doesn't text you back for days can also be such an exciting and, well, intoxicating one. Our mind is looking for the next round of craving, and that'll fit! In contrast, a boring stable relationship has a much smaller gradient for our minds to exploit.

Western culture mistakenly thinks that if we just attain the big thing, we'll be happy. But the bigger the big thing, the bigger the gradient, and the bigger the dissatisfaction. Do you think billionaires are actually satisfied? They absolutely won the game of attainment! But attainment was never the point of the game. What the mind wanted was to want. And craving billions is a sizeable craving! The mind can generate a lot of action from such a large dissatisfaction. The unhappier you are, the happier your mind is (...to a degree, but our minds can in fact drag us into an obsessive black hole of unhappiness for this exact reason). That's why when a lot of Type A folks retire and have no more problems to work on, they explode. If a billionaire is satisfied, it's not because of the billions they made, but because of some wisdom they managed to pick up along the way.

The fact that our default state is one of immortal dissatisfaction can be hard to recognize and harder to accept. Indeed, for the cognitive machinery to work, the mind desperately needs us to believe that satisfaction is attainable as long as we sufficiently manipulate the things "out there." To ascertain the truth about satisfaction, think about a time when you were feeling really satisfied. Maybe you were on a beach on a sunny day with a book slipping out of your hands as you drifted into a nap. Maybe you were cuddling with a lover, the yearning of sex now just a lingering memory. Maybe you were laying on the floor playing with a cat. What's the mark of a truly peaceful moment? In a truly peaceful moment...there's nothing much left to do. Nothing more is required. There is no better place you are rushing off to. If you're doing anything at all, you're just doing that, and it's good just as it is. It feels more precious than it does important.

What you feel in those moments is a brief respite where there's no more local gradient left. But then quickly, your mind grows a new one. Your mind does not want to stay in peace for long. That's because peace is death. The Buddha called it "extinguishing," like a blown out candle flame. Peace is "The End." It's how all the simple stories of our childhood end. "The End" usually comes after the hero defeats the big bad and everyone goes home. Or, "The End" comes after two lovers finally overcome the obstacles and get married. Happily Ever After. No more drama, and nothing interesting to report. What comes before The End? Tension. Yearning. Conflict. These are the essential elements of plot. They are what make the movie fun to watch. Peace, resolution, and completion are totally boring!

The Buddha said the same thing. Peace comes when we stop playing into the mind's yearning game. It turns out there's a second mind. That mind is the dead battery mind. It's the mind that lives in the place beyond The End. It's the mind of utter satisfaction. It's a mind that cannot be grasped, because grasping is an action arising from gradients. No more cycle of highs and lows, no more gradients. The only problem with peace is that you're kind of dead. The air is stale--without any gradients, no wind blows. That's why the way of the Buddha is both the journey to the mountain top and the return trip home. After awakening to peace, you're no longer a victim of the gradient game. You know where the last win lives. But you also want to live a human life, and that means gradients. And gradients means suffering. If you want to act as a human being using the technology of the human mind, you have no other choice. But this time, you can bring a little peace with you. This time, you don't have to believe that real satisfaction comes from attaining anything. You don't have to dig up the whole garden looking for it. You've already got it in your pocket. And maybe you can even show a friend what's in their pocket.
