---
title: Prison Break
author: Shreyan Sen
category: shorts
layout: post
---



Once my teacher Jion told me something I found strange and deep. He said I wasn't simply trapped in the prison of my mind--I *was* the prison of my mind. I want to explore that here a bit.

Imagine your mental awareness is like a string that can take on various shapes. While real string might take the shape of a woven cloth or a big ole knot, this string of the mind takes the shape of perceiving this, liking that, thinking this, feeling that, identifying as this, and so on. In doing so it forgets its string-ness and only knows itself as whatever shape it takes. That shape is in constant flux. What makes the you of five years ago the same you as the you of today? People often see themselves as having some fundamental characteristics (physical, mental, cultural, etc.) that signal their them-ness. But any of these characteristics can change. You might have a stroke or lose an arm and anything about you could change, from your mood to your memories to your ability to open a door or wipe your ass. In the West this idea is grasped by the Ship of Theseus thought experiment. You're on a ship and over many years each piece of the ship is damaged, altered, repaired until no original piece remains. Is it still the same ship? Was the ship the material making up the ship, or was the ship the shape and structure of the ship? It wasn't the material; swap all that out and the ship remains, just as we remain when the cells in our body all die and are reborn. But if it was just the shape, then wouldn't two identical ships be the same ship? That's not it either.

The you of yesteryear is not still you because of any shapes, structures, ideas, or anything else. What really connects you to you is the experience of a shared conscious experience. You feel that the you feeling back then is the same you feeling now, and it'll be the same you feeling later. If it's someone else who hits the ground when you jump off a cliff, then it's someone else's problem. What does this feeling of you-ness have to do with what your favorite food is, or how your first pet made you feel? Even if you forgot all those things, you'll still feel that you are you, though with different memories and experiences. Just like the you of tomorrow is you, even though they have different memories and experiences. It's the jar, not the stuff in the jar, that makes you you. Even an empty jar is still you.

Back to that mental string. Because of various causes and conditions that string twists itself up into something that you identify as your special unique self. But one annoying thing about the string: it likes to cycle through the same set of stable patterns it's gotten used to. Your string might be twisted into the shape of an angry judgy person, and because of this you can't seem to get away from idiots who want to fight you. Your string might be twisted into depression, and because of this you can't get out of bed. Your string might be twisted into the shape of someone looking for an escape through sex drugs and bass, so you're stuck in the same hazy party loop. The string twists, flips around, unravels a bit, ravels a bit more. Karma is just a cat playing with yarn on a lazy afternoon.

The shape is always making demands. It demands that the string keep bending and twisting and maintaining that shape or evolving into the right next shape. And understandably so; if the string doesn't participate, the shape is fucked. The shape is no villain. It's just looking out for itself and its progeny. But these demands go on and on. They are tiring and endless. The shape ends up becoming a prison for the string. Freedom from that prison means the string recognizing it is just string, not the shapes it takes. All these stories with their scoreboards were never as real as they felt at the time.

In your life, the shape of you has its own fears and hopes. These hopes and fears toss you around (Buddhist listicles call them the eight winds: praise and blame, gain and loss, success and failure, joy and sorrow). If the you attains a goal it feels good for a while. Until it does it feels pressure. When it fails to attain a goal, it suffers. It might even make liberation from the illusion of shapes one of its goals and play at twisting into monk shapes. Dogen often admonished his monks about this: "we are monks who have left the home life," say strings fixed firmly into the shape of pursuing shapelessness. Today a mass of lay people take a similar identity as they seek some kind of self-realization; I take this shape whenever I get scared of being shapeless. People call this spiritual ego.

But the string itself has no need to be any particular shape. Its stringiness cannot be threatened by any shape nor can it become any more stringy than it already is. Whatever shape it takes, it is a fine little string. It's only the shape that cries when the shape unravels. The shape and the string do not share the same fate.

Life looks different from the perspective of the string. Different things matter. Different things satisfy. Career choices like doctor or dishwasher are differentiated not by things like prestige or impact, but by how much of a pain each shape is to maintain. There is no incentive to be bigger than you need to be; you don't need extra credit. A castle is bigger and stronger than a hut, but it's also a lot more work to maintain. A castle is also important enough to be a target for a whole new class of enemy. Why deal with that if you don't need to? Jion once told me: when you're free you can build your hut or build your castle, it doesn't matter which. But get free first.

I was never in prison. I *was* the prison. I still am. Or at least, what this I identifies with is the prison. And it turns out that's totally ok, from the string's awakened perspective. Each shape is in a way a valid shape. All those tedious, harrowing demands were coming from the shape's perspective. The shape is only a prison in the sense that the string has forgotten its string nature, and in doing so it has adopted the shape's problems. Through them all, string is just as stringy. String doesn't mind imprisoning itself into shape. Indeed, it has no other choice. Even the shape of an unwound string is a shape, isn't it? And a boring one at that. But boring is a story for another time.

---
Writing this left something to be desired. I felt the spark of inspiration when I started, but enough ego got mixed into the cement and I wasn't able to separate it out from the useless juice that makes the kind of writing I'm interested in. Sometimes through refinement and editing I can purify the writing, but this time I couldn't quite feel my way back to the polished gem. There was too much explaining, too much trying. My shape's games activated. Still, it's fun to write and it's fun to put my writing up. Even if there's a lot of rock mixed up with the gem, it's fine. The world wastes nothing and loses nothing; everything is used just as it is. This truth's counterbalancing truth is that the world never has any use for anything at all, it has no objectives whatsoever. Once I asked Jion: why do we practice? He replied: why does your heart beat?
