---
title: How to Find Home in Oneself
author: Shreyan Sen
category: shorts
layout: post
---

Self-love has never been easy for me. My tendency is to self-criticism and self-judgment. I think it's a protective mechanism from childhood. If I can point out my errors first, then I won't be corrected as harshly. That self-critical persona has an allergic reaction to self-love. But it's ok--that persona is not me, it just lives in me.

Other-love comes to me more easily. Particularly in romantic relationships, I can easily feel a lot of love for the person I'm in love with. I can also more easily accept and enjoy the feeling of being loved, without any self-conscious feedback from my critical persona. Well, what exactly is happening here? Strange though it may sound, those feelings of loving and being loved are not about the other person. Those feelings are coming from me, and they are a fundamental aspect of myself. However, I do not access them by myself. In a relationship, my partner effectively functions as a sacred Love Object who can summon my ability to love and be loved. Many other things can serve as Love Objects, in relation to whom we can summon and experience our own love. For some, it's their cat or dog. For others, it's God.

Unfortunately, when we use others as Love Objects to connect to our own love, we easily become codependent on them. They become a part of the mechanism by which we connect to love, which is basically the feeling that creates a sense of existential solidity and at-home-ness in reality. Without love we feel adrift, without purpose, existentially in crisis. In codependency, we can only access that basic sense of love through another. They become an essential part of our psychological structure--and that puts a weight on them that they cannot really bear. Instead of being solid in our own love and radiating it outwards, we come to need them to be a certain way for us to feel our own love. When they cannot be that way, we feel existentially threatened, and our response is often not stable and loving. We can easily get trapped in cycles of fear and control.

What's really happening is that we are playing out with our partners the drama of the ways we were denied love as children. Most of us had imperfect parents who loved us as best they could, but were not able to give us real unconditional love. "My little one, I see you. I love you just as you are. Your very presence alone is enough for me. I am glad you are here." Very few people learned this lesson in their souls. We were not able to internalize this message of love. The rare child who has internalized this message isn't even really aware that they have. They just feel a sense of basic stability and belonging in this world. For them, that love has transformed into existential solidity. Most of us do not experience this as children. Instead, we grow up existentially insecure, without a solid sense of a home within. We find partners and try to source that sense of stability from the love we feel with them. When that fails us (because few can love with us exactly the way we need it), the pain we really feel is the pain of a child who was not securely held in their parents' unconditional love. When a partnership ends, the tears of loneliness and abandonment we cry are actually those we cried in our childhood, reborn in our severed romantic attachment.

What can we do about it? We have to recognize that the love we feel, and the loss we feel when it's withdrawn, actually has nothing to do with our partners. If another partner comes, we will live the exact same drama again. As long as our partners serve as complicated gateways to our love, we will put great pressure on them trying to extract our love from them. We need to love and be loved within ourselves, without a partner or another Love Object. We need to do that enough that we build our own sense of existential stability, our sense of at-home-ness in our lives. Then, we will feel complete even when we are alone. If we can do this, then we can share love freely with future partners--not from a place of need, but from a place of abundance.

How can we achieve this? We achieve this through the practice of self-love. But self-love is not so straight-forward. It's not self-infatuation. It's not primping up our egos, or repeating affirmations. What is it that we're trying to love? Do we take the role of the lover or the beloved? Do we create a mental projection of ourselves, and try to love that? Do we look in a mirror, and try to feel love for what we see? These scenarios never felt real to me. It always felt like I was *trying* to make a love that just wasn't there.

I have a suggestion. I call it taking a love bath. It's very simple. First, just think about someone you easily feel love for (now or in the past). It can be a partner or ex-partner, or a kind of memory of all of your ex-partners, or any other Love Object (like god or a cat). It doesn't really matter. What matters is feeling how you feel when you are feeling loving. Just do that. Feel loving. It feels so good, doesn't it? Keep feeling it, and focus on the feeling itself. This feeling has nothing to do with what it's pointed towards. This feeling is yours. This is your love, giving. Sit and feel it for however long you want to feel it.

When you're ready, you can move on to the second part of the love bath. Now, imagine being loved. Imagine your partner, ex-partner, ideal partner, or whoever else, is loving you exactly in the way you wish to be loved. Don't focus on what they say or how they look or anything like that. Focus on how it feels during the times in your life when you really have felt loved, seen, understood, safe, held, accepted. It feels so good, doesn't it? Keep feeling it, and focus on the feeling itself. This feeling has nothing to do with where it's coming from. This feeling is yours. This is your love, receiving. Sit and feel it for however long you want to feel it.

That's the basics of a love bath. Just find your feelings of loving and being loved, and enjoy them. The order doesn't matter, and you can even do them at the same time, though I prefer one at a time. You can connect your love to a Love Object that you feel needs love, like your inner child or your face in a mirror. But what matters most isn't who is on the other end. What matters is experiencing the love in your own heart. Your heart is full of love. It's like the sun, constantly glowing with love. We just live unaware of that love, disconnected from it and not experiencing it. That's why we easily feel alone and without a purpose in life. If we practice connecting to our heart's capacity for love enough, we eventually won't need to do it anymore. It'll be fully connected to us, supplying us with an existential sense of home in ourselves. No matter what happens, we will simply feel unconditionally real and valid in our own lives--like a baby in the arms of its cosmic mother.

Try taking a love bath sometime. I like to sit in the sun when I do it. I like feeling the warmth on my skin as I feel the warmth inside my heart. It's such a relief.
