---
title: Lion's Roar
author: Shreyan Sen
category: shorts
layout: post
---

I haven't written in a while. The words stopped coming. But my friend Pablo asked about it, sharing some encouraging thoughts about my writing and writing in general. Encouragement is a powerful thing. Of course I love to use it as ego food--as praise. Praise me peasant! Yuck. God I hate and love praise. But encouragement is much more than praise and mistaking the former for the latter is just robbing yourself. To encourage is to give courage. No small thing.

I'd told him I stopped writing because I ran out of ego. Obviously that's not the case, but when it comes to writing it is the case at least a little. While I've always liked the feel of ink rolling across creamy pages--even when it's the creamy click-clack of keys--there has been an undeniable element of "trying to change things" motivating my writing. It's a deep flaw, really. The essence of codependence: trying to force the other to change so your system can feel release. You can in fact be in a codependent relationship with the whole world.

It's a sign of growth that writing lost this appeal to me. I mean, I was barely even writing to anyone, but that's not the point. Even yelling into the void works when you need to yell. But I got over it. I stopped needing to yell. I stopped needing to change or challenge the insanity I saw around me. There was already more than enough insanity to deal with within myself.

In Buddhism there is talk of two schools called the Mahayana and the Hinayana. Hinayana is somewhat pejorative, meaning the lesser vehicle. Mahayana is a braggart--the greater vehicle. Mahayana people came up with these names. The essential point of distinction is that the Hinayana aim for their own liberation from suffering, becoming Buddhas, whereas the Mahayana aim for the liberation of all beings, becoming Bodhisattvas. Mahayana shit on the goals of their lesser cousins, kind of. The criticism is that when you focus on just yourself, and you actually attain the peace you sought, you stop caring about others. People demonize the ego, but ego keeps you caring. It's a broken, self-centered kind of caring, but it's still caring. Even if you engage with this world from a stupid, needy, selfish perspective, at least you engage. But what of the sage sitting on the rock? What is he doing about the bombs and the floods destroying entire cities? Or, to ask the question that always bothered me: when so many are in such pain, why does the Buddha smile?

You might say that the rock sage does his part by handling his own shit. If everyone could do even that much, we'd have world peace. And it's not like I'm even at the stage of handling my own shit--not with my carbon footprint. So I have to give due respect to Mr. Rock Sage. But is it really enough just to do your part? The Bodhisattva says no. Of course the world needs changing and challenging. Or rather, I need to do this thing called changing and challenging. Not because the world needs changing, but because I need to be myself. Since I'm of this changing world, it really amounts to the same thing. Could be the world doesn't need anything at all and is totally fine going any which way--to heaven, to hell, to wherever. But I need to give a homeless old grandma these coins. I need to acknowledge her and feel how much it must hurt to beg and be rejected. How much humility it must take to experience this and still carry soft eyes. Why? Why is it so hard to reach out and say, "come out of the cold--come here." What stops me from being the human I am? I don't understand at all. It is no one's business but my own that I need to feel these things, ask these things, live this confusion. It's the entirely intimate, private matter of my feeling life. Did I make a difference? No, not at all. In the end, we lost everybody. Nobody was saved, but somebody became human. Even if I live until the day I die, this will still have been the best case scenario.

I think this is what they call the Lion's Roar. It is when, beyond all ego bullshit, and beyond even the dead calm of the rock sage, you find the courageous action that has nothing to do with anything other than you being yourself. This courageous action can be as light as a leaf held by a child, as small as a moment's true encouragement. And then, for the duration of that brief moment, you feel like you're breathing air and standing on ground and there's never been anything to prove. That's how you know. Trees stand firm for no reason at all, laughter booming deep in their roots. And so it is in the human heart.

But it's not easy to let yourself be this way for even one second. How do I be myself, instead of some fake mask? Instead of being a vessel for my trauma as it reanimates itself, leaping from body to body, endless reverb echoing across space and time? That's the journey. And that's the paradox. As part of the journey there comes a time when you stop having things to say. You stop needing the world to change, because the old motivation of your false self has weakened and can no longer organize your voice into words. But you haven't yet found your true self. I haven't yet found my true self. I haven't yet known the ground I'm standing on, smiled, and let out a Lion's Roar in the form of the shoulder my friend leans on. Just a rock being a rock, taking weight without making a fuss. I haven't found the true source of compassion that has nothing to do with pity, nothing to do with morality, nothing to do with wanting to help others, nothing to do with pumping positive feeling to drown out your pain. Even if this compassion is known (because there's no one actually who doesn't know it), it's not really known until it's put into action. And I am still too scared and conditioned to reach out and touch another with my burned skin.

That's exactly what it feels like sometimes--like we're all reaching for each other with burned skin. Maybe our skin will never heal. Maybe the lightest touch is enough. Once, the Buddha held up a flower. I like to think he gave it a twirl.
