---
title: Love Parched
author: Shreyan Sen
category: shorts
layout: post
---


The room almost had a ceiling, purple-flowering vines crawling over netted trellis strung above a lime white Spanish courtyard. The foliage was dense enough to shield out most of the late afternoon sun, except for a large sunbeam that draped itself lazily over a dark brown door. He sat there alone except for the comforting scritch-scratch of a broom in tune with its purpose, and the man who swept with it. His eyes didn't quite have tears in them, but it was enough to make him wonder if he would count it. Not a day had gone by without a cry, the six day streak marking a record over the course of his adult life. Of course, he'd bawled all the other days. Not that he was worried. He still had all night.

Two youths entered the courtyard. A boy and a girl acting like springtime. Appropriate--it was a library after all. An immaculately curated third space with no coffee-shaped entry fee. He wondered where everybody was. Not that he minded. The place felt no less hallowed without its crowd. And it was big enough to hold his almost tears alongside the sounds of their gentle laughter.

When the time felt right he got up and walked out. There was a donation box by the door, but he'd already paid his entrance fee to the homeless madonna and child sitting to the right of the door, followed by a second round to the crone on the left of the door. Her visual aspect was striking, with vitiligo-borne pale skin stretching across her forehead except for a brown cross-shaped patch right in the middle. What if god was one of us indeed? With this thought passing through his mind he'd donated the first time, practicing as usual to give from a fresh heart unstained by arrogance, or worse, pity. Since he'd already paid the toll she simply waved him past this time. Again, he felt something compelling about her. He crossed the street to discreetly watch. Her head bowed and covered by a thin cloth, tucked into her small frame, reminded him of his grandmother. He always hated seeing his grandmother sitting in the street like that. Her motions had a jerkiness and energy to them that belied her small size. She'd jut her cup into the street as she loudly addressed a new passerby, her head and eyes wandering this way and that. "Notice me...please?" He could feel all the fear and anxiety that had hardened into her to make her move like that. He crossed back over and paid a second toll, 25 times the size of his first one. The gratitude and relief--it was almost harder to meet than the suffering. He looked away sooner than he should have. But he was glad. He wasn't going to miss the money. And it wasn't going to change her situation. But still, why not offer even one single afternoon of relief? One day off from begging. Why not. What the hell. I don't hate you at all grandma, he thought. Not at all. I wish you had some peace on those bones.

He walked back along the little park he'd passed earlier in the day, slowing his footsteps down to match the rhythm of mindful walking. The day hadn't exactly gone according to plan. He was supposed to be on a self-retreat, but he kept fucking up the schedule. Still, it was a much better organized day than most. Meditation, yoga, walking meditation, some creative work, a bit more reading than planned. The book, on love life, was very sensible and very helpful and very wise. He still missed her anyways. The author had a way of getting you to eat your vegetables when it came to healthy relationship attitudes. He appreciated the point that relationships took more than mutual attraction. They needed commitment and a solid plan to build something together. Putting one's romantic feelings above everything else in life was dangerous stuff, and nothing strong could be built on a foundation like that. First came cultivating a satisfying, meaningful life within oneself, and then came sharing it with others. Make her your center, and you'd be putting the weight of your entire being on her. That's not loving at all. Twice over the past two days he'd almost called her and told her he wanted to try and make it work, obstacles be damned. That he missed her and didn't want to be without her. That he regretted his own ambivalence, and he wished he'd fought harder for her. But was it enough to just offer love, when so much about them didn't make sense?

He thought about his meditation teacher's usual advice. It doesn't matter where you are, what you do, who you're with. It doesn't matter if you get the girl or you lose her. Just dig deep. Dig past the layers of self-bullshit, until you hit the river of peace underneath. A peace that doesn't come from chasing things or running from them. One that he could build a life on. One that, once found, could be shared as love. He could feel the pain digging into him, making him deep. Life would make him a well in the desert, bringing some small relief to its parched people. He could almost feel the water. He walked until he arrived home, and his tears came again.
