---
title: Accepting The Unacceptable
author: Shreyan Sen
category: shorts
layout: post
---

Right now, many of us feel fear and anger at the state of the world. We feel that people are suffering unjustly, and that things are not as they should be. In the face of injustice, the spiritual advice to practice acceptance can feel insufficient, complacent, even immoral. Aren't some things unacceptable? How are we supposed to accept those things? I used to wonder: if people are suffering, then why does the Buddha smile? How can he be at peace while the world suffers? Shouldn't the suffering of the world bother him?

This is a difficult problem that I will explore for my entire life. Accepting the unacceptable is a paradox, like most deep wisdom is. To help explore the paradox, I find it helpful to work with another famous paradox from the Heart Sutra:

> *Form is Emptiness, Emptiness is Form*

Form refers to our conventional ideas about things existing--for example, the conviction we have that we are a self with our thoughts, our feelings, and our bodies. Emptiness refers to a different vibe we start to feel through practice and meditation--that we are not just our thoughts, our feelings, and our bodies, and that the essence of our "us-ness" doesn't seem to be found in any of our parts at all. It's really hard to describe emptiness, but there are Western philosophical paradoxes that hit on the same generative contradiction between self and other, parts and whole, and I find they help when it comes to getting a feel for emptiness. My favorites are the Ship of Theseus (also called The Grandfather's Axe) and the famed philosophical debate about how to define a chair ("what is a chair?" and "what am I?" end up being related questions). We can also ask what it means for something to be red, when red as an experience is based in the way the human eye and brain works. A fly with different eye technology sees the same flower I do as a totally different thing--so are the things I see really what I am looking at? What did they look like before there were humans or flies? What would they look like if our sense of temporal scaling was based in an atomic clock rather than a chemical clock, and a second felt like a thousand years? Where I see a chair in a room, what does god see?

I don't want to dive too deep into emptiness. Instead I want to discuss how to work with paradox as a generative engine of insight. Here, the paradox is to analyze our perspective of form through the critique of emptiness--but rather than concluding that emptiness is "right" we then analyze our perspective of emptiness through the critique of form. Basically, the paradox is always correcting us. If we think form, it shouts emptiness. If we think emptiness, it shouts form.

Let's dive in. First, we try "form is emptiness." We move away from identifying as this self by looking at how none of these thoughts and feelings we ascribe to ourselves really define us. Any of our parts can change and we're still us, because our "us-ness" is not about our qualities--so then who are we? If we pull on these threads through meditative practice, we might realize we're actually just a part of the universe itself. That the feeling of separation we have is just a feeling and an illusion, and we're no more separate from the universe than a bubble is separate from the river it's formed in, or a wave is separate from the ocean it moves in.

Well, if you take this all the way then you might just walk into the street and get hit by a car. Who cares, right? Who is there to die after all? There's just the universe universing, before and after the accident. In fact, not only is there no us to get hit, there's no car to hit us with, and no accident to be before or after. Or at least, these things don't exist the way we ordinarily think they do. If two bubbles crash together, from the bubbles' perspective it's an accident. From the river's perspective, it's all just a game of froth.

From an ordinary perspective this emptiness stuff is all bullshit, because our sense of self and our fear and our desire to live are quite tangible and obvious--just as obvious as the redness of a rose! Our psychology exists precisely to navigate dangers, so of course it's hard to relax that sense of self. But if you practice meditation on and off the cushion, it might happen. When you encounter the bliss of surrender it's possible to stop caring about everything "you" care about.

In fact, being one with everything all the time can be downright unhealthy. There is a reason the delusion of separation exists. It's relieving to break through your problems with emptiness, but you can get stuck there. It's not too likely you'll actually walk in front of a car on purpose, but you might get carefree enough to do so on accident. In your bliss you might neglect to file your taxes or pick up your kids. Red flag!

Fortunately, wisdom doesn't abandon us in this dead heaven. It brings us back with "emptiness is form." You come back to knowing that even though you are ultimately just the universe having a little human experience, you also have to live that human experience out! You don't just stay living as the universe.

So that's the paradox. If you're human, wisdom reminds you that you are the universe. If you're the universe, wisdom reminds you that you are human. This creates a loop, a tension, an atom with its own proton and electron circling each other. And that atom is the basic building block of living an awakened life. In your day to day, you might lean too much into awareness of form, getting stuck in your problems. Then the way of emptiness helps you de-identify, but before you go too far and spiritually bypass all your problems the way of form reminds you to practice this ordinary life as a skinbag full of flesh and bones. "Form is emptiness" means you realize the futility of trying to manipulate the outside world in order to induce a peaceful inner world, opting instead to directly rest in peace. "Emptiness is form" means you do the dishes to escape the Zen K-hole.

What happens when we apply this "back-and-forth" way of practicing to the paradox of accepting the unacceptable?

The unacceptable plays the role of form. When you see a cold hungry homeless old woman on the street, as rich happy well-fed couples pass her by without even a look of acknowledgement, what can you conclude other than that "this is unacceptable?" It's just as real as the color red.

Acceptance plays the role of emptiness. Simply put, you surrender. You give up. You acknowledge that you don't know what to do about this suffering. That you don't know how to change things. This world is much bigger than you. Maybe things happen for a reason. Maybe they don't. Surrender is a response to deep suffering. It comes when you're faced with problems you can't ignore but you also can't fix. That is why no mud no lotus. Maybe you lost someone you loved, or maybe you're that old woman on the street. Maybe you're afraid because your security is gone, or you did something you can't undo. You try every way out, but you can't escape. So finally you surrender your very sense of self. Everything you have and have lost, everything you are and you are not, you once received from life itself. You are not self-made. Life made you. Recognizing this you give possession of all things--the good, the bad, the ugly--back to life.

From surrender, peace arises. The Buddha smiles.

---
And then the wheel of the paradox keeps turning. Stopping at surrender is stopping at "form is emptiness." We continue. Accepting the unacceptable and realizing inner peace gives us new eyes and new hands. Peace has no mission; it does not need to change the world. Precisely because of this, it has the power to move the world in a new way. This is why Being Peace creates radical change, but the desire for radical change must be released to Be Peace. It feels like giving up on the dream of justice, which is why it happens when you have no other choice--when your suffering is so great, you surrender fully and give up even the dream of justice.

It's reasonable to be afraid of giving that dream up. Peace is the end of the story. That's why Nirvana is likened to the extinguishing of a candle. Cessation. Death. Peace is not conducive towards completing your to do list. Being stuck in peace creates complacency. That is why the real spiritual path is to integrate the spiritual view with the ordinary view. We integrate our drive to create a better world with the peace which is born from realizing that this world is completely perfect just as it is. Going too far in either direction, wisdom calls us into the other direction, just as it did with the puzzle of form is emptiness, emptiness is form. Our lifetimes unfold as we make mistake after mistake working with the paradox, sometimes running into our righteousness, and other times running into our complacency. It's like riding a bicycle. You're always falling a bit to the left or to the right, but because you're constantly rebalancing, you can keep going forward.

I'll end with a koan my teacher shared with me to help me with accepting the unacceptable. A Zen student is sitting with his teacher. The student attains a great awakening and proclaims that he sees how all things are one and holy and beautiful and Buddha Nature. He accepts the whole world just as it is. The Zen master hawks a nasty loogie and spits it right at the student's foot. The student recoils in disgust.
